Leaves of Hypnos
1
As much as possible, teach how to become effective only as far as the goal, but no farther. Farther is smoke. Where there is smoke there is unpredictability.
2
Do not linger in the rut of results.
3
Guide the real into action like a flower slipped into the tart mouths of infants. Ineffable knowledge of the desperate diamond (life).
4
To be stoic is to congeal, with the beautiful gaze of Narcissus. We calculated every suffering the torturer could possibly extract from every inch of our bodies; then, sick at heart, we went and faced him.
5
We belong to no one except the golden point of light from that lamp unknown to us, inaccessible to us that keeps awake courage and silence.
6
The poet’s effort strives to transform old enemies into loyal adversaries, every fertile tomorrow hinging on the project’s success, especially when the whole gamut of sails bellies out, intertwines, declines, is decimated, where the wind of the continents gives up its heart to the wind of the abyss.
7
This war will stretch beyond platonic armistices. The implanting of political concepts will proceed contradictorily with the convulsive stealth of a hypocrisy certain of its rights. Don’t smile. Thrust from you skepticism, resignation, and prepare your mortal soul to face, within the city walls, glacial demons analogous to fiendish microbes.
8
Reasonable beings entirely lose sight of their probable life span and their daily equilibrium when the instinct for self-preservation caves in to the property instinct. They become hostile to the slightest quivering of the atmosphere and give themselves wholeheartedly to being wooed by lies and evil. Their miserable condition crumbles under a malevolent hailstorm.
9
After initial fumblings, Crazy Arthur [Arthur le Fol] now participates with the full force of his resolute nature in our games of chance. His keen appetite for action must be satisfied with the precise task I assign him. He obeys and controls himself, for fear of being scolded! Without that, God only knows in what final hornets’ nest his bravery would land him! Loyal Arthur, like a soldier in ancient times!
10
All the authority, tactics and ingenuity in the world cannot replace one particle of conviction in the service of truth. I think I’ve improved this commonplace.
11
My brother The Pruner, of whom I have no news, used jokingly to call himself a cousin to the cats of Pompeii. By the time we learned of this generous creature’s deportation, his prison could no longer open; chains defied his courage, Austria had him in its clutches.
12
What brought me into the world and will chase me from it only intrudes at moments when I am too weak to resist. Old when I was born. When I die she will be young, unknown. One and the same Passerby.
13
Time seen through the image is time lost from view. Being and time are quite different. The image shimmers eternal, when it has outstripped being and time.
14
I am quite convinced, after two conclusive tests, that the thug who slipped into our midst, without our knowledge, is irredeemable. A bully (he boasts of it), malicious as vermin, flinching before the enemy, wallowing in reports of horror like a pig in mud; nothing to be hoped for, except the gravest trouble, from this unscrupulous scoundrel. Capable, in addition, of introducing a fluid villainy here. I’ll do the thing myself.
15
Children are bored on Sunday. Sparrow [Passereau] proposes a twenty-four-day week in order to carve Sunday up. Why not an hour of Sunday added to each day, at mealtimes preferably, since there are no more breadcrumbs. But just don’t mention Sunday to him anymore.
16
Communicating with the angel, our primordial care. (Angel, that part of man which safeguards from religious compromise the language of highest silence, whose meaning is not measured out. Tuner of lungs who gilds the nutritious grapes of the impossible. Know the blood, ignore the celestial. Angel: the candle that leans to the heart’s north.)
17
My heart is always content to stop at Forcalquier, to have a meal at the Bardouin’s1, to shake hands with Marius the printer and Figuière. This rock of worthy people is the citadel of friendship. All that shackles lucidity and slows down trust is banished here. We have married each other, once and for all, in the presence of the essential. Persons cited under their real names, restored in the month of September 1944. *1 Persons cited under their real names, restored in the month of September 1944.
18
Keep for later the imaginary part, which is, itself too, capable of action.
19
The poet cannot remain for long in the stratosphere of the Word. He must coil up in new tears and push further into his own order.
20
I think about that army of deserters with an appetite for dictatorship whom the survivors of this era of accursed algebra may well see in power again, in this forgetful country.
21
Bitter future, bitter future, dancing amidst the rosebushes...
22
TO THE PRUDENT: It is snowing on the maquis, and hunting us down is perpetually in season. You whose house does not weep, within whom greed is crushing love, in the succession of these hot days your fire is nothing but a sick-nurse. Too late. Your cancer has spoken. The native land has lost its powers.
23
This crenelated present...
24
France reacts like floating wreckage whose nap has been disturbed. If only the hull workers and carpenters bustling around in the allied camp aren’t new shipwreckers!
25
Noon separated from day. Midnight cut off from men. Midnight with its putrid knell, which one o’clock, two o’clock, three o’clock, four o’clock do not succeed in muzzling...
26
Time is no longer assisted by clocks, whose hands today devour each other on man’s face. Time is crabgrass, and man will become crabgrass sperm.
27
Leon avers that mad dogs are beautiful. I believe him.
28
There exists one kind of man who is always ahead on his excrements.
29
By virtue of its very special breast-feeding, this era fosters the prosperity of those riffraff who make child’s play of leaping the barriers society set up against them in the past. Will the mechanism stimulating them break them as it breaks down, when its hideous supplies are gone? (And the fewest possible survivors of this high evil.)
30
Archduke [Archiduc] confides he found his truth when he adopted the Resistance. Up to then, he was a player in his irreverent suspicious life. Insincerity was poisoning him. Bit by bit he was enveloped in a sterile sadness. Today he loves, he gives of himself, he is engaged, he goes naked, he provokes. I do appreciate this alchemist.
31
I write briefly. I can hardly absent myself for long. Self-display would lead to obsessing. The adoration of the shepherds is no longer useful to the planet.
32
A man without shortcomings is a mountain without crevasses. He doesn’t interest me. (Dowser’s rule of thumb, and worrier’s.)
33
Redbreast, my friend, who used to arrive when the grounds were deserted, this fall your song sets off a landslide of memories that the ogres would very much like to hear.
34
Marry and do not marry your house.
35
You will be part of the fruit’s flavor.
36
Era when the dead-tired sky penetrates the earth, when man lies dying between two contempts.
37
Revolution and counterrevolution mask themselves to confront each other once again. Short-lived candor! To the combat of eagles now succeeds the combat of octopuses. The genius of man, who thinks he has discovered categorical truths, accomodates truths that kill in truths that authorize killing. The grandiose aberrant mystics on parade at the front lines of this armored panting universe! Whereas collective neuroses indict themselves in the eye of myth and symbol, psychic man submits life to torture, apparently without its causing him the least remorse. The tracked flower, the hideous flower, turns its black petals toward the mad flesh of the sun. Where are you, fountainhead? Where are you, remedy? System, will you change at last?
38
They flop down with the full weight of their prejudices or inebriated by the heat of their false principles. To include them, exorcise them, unburden them, strengthen them, relax them, then convince them that, after a certain point, the importance of received ideas is extremely relative and that ultimately this "business" is a business of life or death, it is not about the triumph of nuances at the heart of a civilization whose shipwreck threatens to leave not a trace on the ocean of destiny—it is for this that I struggle to gain approval around me.
39
We are torn between the craving to know and the despair of having known. The goad does not give up its sting nor we our hope.
40
Discipline, how you bleed!
41
If at times there were no watertight boredom, the heart would stop beating.
42
Between the two shots that decided his destiny, he had time to call a fly "Madame."
43
Mouth that used to decide if this were marriage or mourning, poison or libation, beauty or disease, what has become of bitterness and its dawn, sweetness? Hideous head that worsens and spoils!
44
Friends, the snow awaits the snow for work simple and pure, at the outer limit of the air and earth.
45
I dream of a country festooned, benevolent, suddenly irritated by the labors of the sensible, and moved, too, by the ardor of a few gods, when women are around.
46
The act is virgin, even repeated.
47
Martin de Reillanne calls us: the on-the-sly.
48
I am not afraid. I am only dizzy. I must reduce the distance between the enemy and me. Confront him horizontally.
49
What can seduce us about eternal nothingness is that there the loveliest of days might just as easily be this one or that one. (Let’s lop this branch. No hive will come to dangle here.)
50
In the face of everything, ALL THAT, a Colt, promise of the rising sun!
51
Uproot him from his land of origin. Replant him in the presumably harmonious soil of the future, with the possibility of only partial success. Give him the feel of progress through the senses. That is the secret of my skill.
52
Mice in the anvil. This image would have charmed me in the past. It suggests a swarm of sparks dispersed as lightning. (The anvil is cold, the iron no longer glowing, the imagination ravaged.)
53
The mistral that had risen didn’t make things any easier. As the hours wore on, my fear increased, scarcely reassured by Cabot’s watching for any convoys passing along the road that might stop to attack us. The first crate exploded as it touched the ground. The fire, accelerated by the wind, spread to the woods and rapidly became conspicuous on the horizon. The plane modified its course a little and carried out a second drop. The cylinders at the ends of multicolored silks scattered over a vast expanse. For hours we struggled in the midst of hellish brightness, our group divided in three: one part confronting the fire, busy with shovels and axes; the second sent out to locate scattered arms and explosives, bringing them within reach of trucks; the third constituting a defense squad. Panic-stricken squirrels leapt from the tops of the pines into the blaze, miniscule comets. e just managed to elude the enemy. Dawn caught us earlier than he did. (Beware of the anecdote. It’s a railroad station where the stationmaster hates the switchman!)
54
Stars in the month of May... Each time I raise my eyes toward the sky, my jaw is overcome with nausea. I no longer hear, mounting from the freshness of my depths, the groan of pleasure, murmur of woman opened. A cinder of prehistoric cactuses shatters my desert! I am no longer capable of dying... Cyclone, cyclone, cyclone...
55
Never definitively molded, man harbors his contrary. His cycles design different spheres, depending on which attraction he’s exposed to. And the mysterious depressions, the absurd inspirations, risen from the huge outpatient crematorium—how to force oneself to ignore them? Ah! To circulate generously through the seasons of the bark, while the almond palpitates, free...
56
The poem is furious ascension; poetry, the play of arid riverbanks.
57
The spring is rock and the tongue is sliced off.
58
Word, storm, ice and blood will ultimately form a common frost.
59
If man did not sometimes supremely close his eyes, he would end up no longer seeing what’s worth looking at.
60
Flood with sunlight the imagination of those who stammer instead of speaking, who blush in the instant of assertion. They are steadfast partisans.
61
An officer, up from North Africa, is astonished that my "resistance guys," as he calls them, express themselves in a language whose meaning escapes him, his ear rebelling at "talk in images." I point out to him that slang is merely picturesque, whereas the language used here springs from the wonder communicated by the beings and things in whose intimacy we live continuously.
62
Our inheritance is preceded by no testament.
63
You only fight well for causes you yourself have shaped, with which you identify—and burn.
64
What will they do with us afterwards? That’s the question preoccupying Minot, whose seventeen years add, "Me, maybe I’ll go back to being the slacker I was at fifteen..." This child too easily swayed by the example of his comrades, whose good will is too impersonally identical with theirs, never looks into himself. Right now this saves him. I fear that afterwards he will return to his charming lizards, for whose insouciance cats lie in wait...
65
The quality of resistance fighters is not, alas, always the same! Next to Joseph Fontaine, as straight and sure as a furrow, Francis Cuzin, Claude Dechavannes, Andre Grillet, Marius Bardouin, Gabriel Besson, Doctor Jean Roux, Roger Chaudon turning the grain silo at Oraison into a fortress of dangers, how many slippery charlatans, more interested in pleasuring themselves than in producing! It is to be expected that these cocks of nothingness will crow our ears off, once the Liberation comes...
66
If I yield to that fear which controls life’s cowardice, immediately I bring forth a crowd of unequivocal friendships that fly to my aid.
67
Armand, the weatherman, defines his role: the enigmatic service.
68
Dregs in the brain: to the east of the Rhine. Moral mismanagement: on this side.
69
I see man lost to political perversions, confusing action with expiation, naming his annihilation conquest.
70
The demons’ silent alcohol.
71
Night, swift as the boomerang carved of our bones, and whistling, whistling...
72
Act as a primitive, foresee as a strategist.
73
If we’re to believe the subsoil of the grass, where a pair of crickets sang tonight, prenatal life must have been very sweet.
74
Solitary and multiple. Vigil and sleep like a sword in its scabbard. Stomach for distinct foods. Altar candle’s altitude.
75
Quite depressed by that transmission (London), awakening, precisely, the nostalgia for help...
76
I said to Carlate, who was wandering: "When you’re dead, you’ll occupy yourself with the things of death. We will no longer be with you. We’re already lacking enough resources to do our work and gather in its feeble results. I don’t want mist to weigh on our roads because clouds choke your summits. The hour is ripe for metamorphoses. Put it to good use or get out." (Carlate is sensitive to solemn rhetoric. He’s a sonorous defeatist, a fat infrared.)
77
How to hide from what must join with you? (A deviation of modernity.)
78
What matters most in certain situations is to curb euphoria in time.
79
I thank chance, which has granted that the poachers of Provence are fighting in our camp. The memory of the woods that these primitives possess, their aptitude for calculation, their sharp sense of smell in any weather—I would be surprised at a failing in this quarter. I will see to it that they are shod like gods!
80
We are chronic sidereal invalids to whom, satanically, life lends the illusion of health. Why? To consume life and mock health? (I must fight my penchant for this kind of limp pessimism, an intellectual heritage...)
81
Acquiescence lights up the face. Refusal gives it beauty.
82
Sober almond trees, dreamy and pugnacious olive trees: against the outspread fan of dusk, post our strange health...
83
The poet, keeper of the infinite faces of the living.
84
It skins the soul alive to step back from your intimacy with someone, in the very moment when you take responsibility for his training. Tied hand and foot, involuntarily, I experience this fate and ask forgiveness of this being.
85
Icy curiosity. Appraisal with no object.
86
The purest harvests are sown in earth that does not exist. They eliminate gratitude and are indebted only to spring.
87
LS*, I thank you for the Durance 12 base. It begins functioning tonight. You will make sure that the young cohort assigned to the area doesn’t get drawn into appearing too often in the streets of Duranceville. Girls and cafes dangerous for more than a minute. Don’t, however, pull too hard on the reins. I do not want an informer in the unit. Out of network no communication. Put a stop to boasting. Verify information with two sources. Be aware fifty percent fiction in most cases. Teach your men to pay attention, report with exactitude, know how to lay out the arithmetic of situations. Gather rumors and synthesize. Drop-point and mailbox with the friend of grains. Possibility Waffen operation, foreigners’ camp, les Mées, spreading to Jews and Resistance. Spanish Republicans very much in danger. Urgent you forewarn them. As for you, avoid combat. Base sacred. If an alert, disperse. Except to free a captured comrade, never give the enemy any sign of your existence. Intercept suspects. I trust your judgment. The camp will never be exposed. No camp exists, just charcoal-burners that do not smoke. No clothes drying when planes fly over, and all the men under trees and in the brush. Nobody will come to see you on my behalf, except for the friend of grains and the Swimmer. With the men of the unit be rigorous and attentive. Friendship cushions discipline. At work, always carry a few kilos more than everyone else, without being proud of it. Eat and smoke visibly less than they do. Do not play favorites. Allow only off-the-cuff and inessential lies. No calling out to each other from faraway. Their bodies and bedding to be kept clean. Let them learn to sing low and not to whistle obsessively, to tell the bare-faced truth. At night, they should walk along the edges of paths. Suggest precautions; give them credit for the idea. Emulation excellent. Discourage monotonous habits. Applaud those you’d like to see continue. Finally, love those they love, in the same moment that they do. Add, do not divide. All goes well here. Fondly. HYPNOS * Léon Zyngerman, alias Léon Saingermain.
88
How can you hear me? I’m speaking from so faraway...
89
François, exhausted by five successive nights on high alert, says to me: "I’d give my saber for a cup of coffee!" François is twenty years old.
90
Once, names were given to the different slices of duration: this was a day, that a month, this empty church a year. Now we are colliding with that second when death is most violent, life most clear-cut.
91
We are wandering around well stones from which they have removed the wells.
92
Everything that has the face of anger and does not raise its voice.
93
The battle of perseverance. The symphony that carried us is silenced. We must believe in alternation. So many mysteries have not been penetrated or destroyed.
94
This morning, while I was examining a tiny snake as it slipped between two stones, Felix cried out, "The blindworm of grief!" The disappearance of Lefèvre, killed last week, crops up superstitiously as an image.
95
The shadows of the Word benumb and immunize me. 1 do not participate in the enchanting death throes. Of a stone sobriety, I remain the mother of distant cradles.
96
You can’t reread yourself, but you can sign your name.
97
The plane swerves down. Invisible pilots discharge their nocturnal garden, then press a brief light under the wing to signal that it’s finished. All that remains is to gather in the scattered treasure. Just so, the poet...
98
The poem’s line of flight. It should be felt by each.
99
He looked to me like a dead partridge, that poor cripple the jVlilitians murdered at Vachères, after having stripped him of what little he possessed, accusing him of harboring rebels. Before they killed him, the thugs played around a long time, with a girl who took part in their expedition. A torn-out eye, a crushed thorax, the innocent fellow took the brunt of this inferno and THEIR LAUGHTER. (We captured the girl.)
100
We must overcome our rage and our disgust, we must insure that they are shared, to elevate and extend our action, our morale.
101
Imagination, my child.
102
Memory cannot affect recollections. Recollections are powerless over memory. Happiness no longer mounts.
103
A meter of guts to measure our chances.
104
Only the eyes are still capable of crying out.
105
The mind, back and forth, like that insect who as soon as the light goes out scratches in the kitchen, jostles the silence, crunches up filth.
106
Diabolical duties.
107
You do not offer a bed to tears as you would to a passing guest.
108
Passionate powers and rules of action.
109
All the massive fragrance of these flowers, to soothe the night falling on our tears.
110
Eternity is scarcely longer than life.
111
The light has been hunted from our eyes. It lies buried somewhere in our bones. We in our turn hunt for it, to restore its crown.
112
The paradisiac stamp of cosmic authorization. (Confined in my narrowest night, may this grace be accorded me, overwhelming, even more meaningful than those signs glimpsed from such a height that there is no need to guess at them.)
113
Be an intimate friend to that which will not happen—religiously, in mad solitude, in that series of impasses without nourishment where the beloved face begins to disappear.
114
I will write no poem of acquiescence.
115
In the Garden of Olives, who was extra?
116
Don’t keep track too closely of the duplicity that people demonstrate. In reality, the lode is severed in many places. Let this be stimulating rather than a subject of irritation.
117
Claude said to me: "Women are queens of the absurd. The more a man gets involved with them, the more they complicate the involvement. From the day I became a ‘partisan,’ I’ve no longer been unhappy or disappointed..." There is plenty of time to teach Claude that you don’t carve up your life without cutting yourself.
118
Woman of punishment. Woman of resurrection.
119
I am thinking of the woman I love. Suddenly her face is masked. The void in its turn sickens.
120
You hold a match to your lamp and what ignites casts no light. It is far, very far from you, that the circle illuminates.
121
I took aim at the lieutenant and the colonel, Esclabesang. Flowering broom hid us behind its flamboyant yellow vapor. Jean and Robert threw grenades. The small enemy column immediately retreated. Except for the machine-gunner—but he did not have time to get dangerous: his belly exploded. The two cars served as our escape. The colonel’s briefcase was full of interest.
122
Fountain-of-the-Poor, sumptuous fountain. (The march was backbreaking, mouth-dredging.)
123
In these young men, a moving appetite for conscience. No trace of their fathers’ frequent ups and downs. Ah! to be able to set them on the right road through the human condition, the one you needn’t fear will someday need repair. But since God stays out of our quarrels and the vise of origins is weakening, we will have to demand from new experts an amplitude of thought and a minute attention to detail whose early signs I do not discern.
124
FRANCE-OF-THE-CAVES
125
Start the intelligence on its way without the aid of ordnance maps.
126
Between reality and its narrative, there is your life, which magnifies reality, and the Nazi degradation, which blights the narrative.
127
The time will come when nations on the hopscotch board of the universe will depend as closely on each other as the organs of one body, unified in its structure. Filled to bursting with machines, will the brain still be able to safeguard the existence of our thin rivulet of dream and escape? an marches at a sleepwalker’s pace toward murderous mines, led on by the inventors’ song...
128
The baker had not yet unfastened the metal curtains of his shop when already the village was besieged, gagged, hypnotized, suspended in utter immobility. Two SS companies and a detachment of militia held it beneath the muzzles of their machine guns and their mortars. Then the ordeal began. The inhabitants were thrown out of their houses and ordered to assemble in the central square. Keys in all the locks. One old man, hard of hearing, who didn’t respond quickly enough to the order, saw the four walls and roof of his barn shattered by a bomb. For four hours I had been awake. Marcelle had come to whisper the alert through my shutters. I immediately saw the futility of trying to get past the cordon of surveillance to reach the countryside. Quickly I changed dwellings. The uninhabited house where I took refuge would make effective armed resistance possible, in my last moments. Through the window I could follow, from behind yellowed curtains, the nervous comings and goings of the occupiers. None of my people were present in the village. This thought cheered me. Several kilometers away, they would follow my instructions and remain undercover. The sound of blows reached me, punctuated by curses. The SS had caught a young mason as he returned from setting traps. His fright destined him for their torture. A voice leaned screaming over the swollen body: ‘Where is he? Take us,’ followed by silence. And kicks and rifle butts rained down. An insane rage took hold of me, banished my anguish. My hands communicated their clenched sweat to my weapon, exalted its controlled power. I calculated that the poor fellow would be quiet for five more minutes, then, inevitably, he would talk. It shamed me to wish for his death before he could deliver. At that moment there appeared, gushing from every street, a tide of women, children, old people, who were reporting to the assembly point, according to an agreed-upon plan. They hurried without haste, literally streaming over the SS, paralyzing them, ‘with the best of intentions.’ The mason was left for dead. Furious, the patrol cut a path through the crowd and moved on. Now, with infinite prudence, eyes anxious and good looked in my direction, passed over my window like a stream of light. I half-showed myself and a smile stood out against my pallor. I was attached to these beings by a thousand trusting threads, not one of which had broken. I loved my fellow men ferociously that day, far beyond the sacrifice. *Wasn’t it chance that had chosen me for prince, rather than the heart, ripened for me, of this village? (1945)
129
We are like those toads who in the austere night of the marshes call to each other and do not see each other, bending to their love cry all the fatality of the universe.
130
Out of the refuse of mountains I have constructed men who will briefly perfume the glaciers.
131
At all the meals we take in common, we invite freedom to sit down. The chair remains empty, but the place continues to be set.
132
It seems the imagination, which to some degree haunts every creature’s mind, can’t wait to separate from the latter when offered only "the impossible" and "the inaccessible" for ultimate mission. We must admit that poetry is not everywhere supreme.
133
“Charitable works will have to be maintained because man is not charitable.” Stupidity. Ah! blood-stained poverty.
134
We are like those fish trapped alive in the ice of mountain lakes Matter and nature seem to protect them but hardly limit the fisherman’s luck.
135
You needn’t love men to be of real help to them. You need only want to make the expression in their eyes better as they look on what is more impoverished than they, and to prolong by one second some pleasant moment in their lives. With this approach and each root treated, their breathing will grow more serene. Above all do not entirely deprive them of those painful paths on which exertion gives way to the clarity of truth, as tears and fruit.
136
The young hold the spade. Ah, may it not be taken from them!
137
The goats are on the right of the herd. (It is well that guile stay close to innocence when the shepherd is skilled, the dog reliable.)
138
Horrible day! I was present, some hundred meters away, at B’s execution. I had only to pull the trigger on the machine gun and he was saved! We were on the heights overlooking Céreste, with weapons enough to break the bushes, and equal in number to the SS. They unaware of the fact that we were there. To the eyes everywhere around me that begged for the signal to open fire I responded no with a shake of the head... The June sun slid a polar cold into my bones. He fell as though he didn’t even see his executioners, and so light, it seemed to me, that the least puff of wind must have lifted him off the earth. I did not give the signal because this village had to be spared at any price. What is a village? A village like any other? Did he perhaps know, in that last instant?
139
It is enthusiasm that lifts the weight of the years. It is the hoax that tells of the century’s fatigue.
140
Life should start with an explosion and end with a peace agreement? Absurd.
141
The counter-terror is this valley little by little brimmed with mist, it is the fleeting buzz of the leaves like a swarm of torpid Roman candles, it is this heaviness dispersed, this muffled movement of animals and insects etching a thousand marks into the tender bark of the night, it is this grain of alfalfa in the dimple of a face caressed, this fire on the moon which will never catch fire, it is a miniscule day-after whose intentions are unknown to us, it is the brightly-colored bust that bowed smiling, it is the shadow a few feet away of a brief companion who bends over, worrying that the leather of his belt is going to give... Of what importance then the hour and the place the devil has fixed for our rendezvous!
142
Era of enraged mountains and fantastic friendship.
143
EVE-OF-THE-MOUNTAINS. This young woman whose indivisible life had the exact dimension of our night’s heart.
144
How your old butterfly bones prickled!
145
Happiness which is no more than deferred anxiety. Blue-ged happiness, admirably insubordinate, that springs from pleasure, pulverizes the present and all its pleading.
146
Roger was utterly happy he’d become the husband-who-hid-god in his young wife’s opinion. Yesterday I passed along the edge of the sunflower field whose sight used to exhilirate him. Dryness curved the heads of these admirable, these insipid flowers. It is a few feet away that his blood flowed, at the foot of an old mulberry, deaf with the full thickness of its bark.
147
Will we someday be like those craters where volcanoes no longer come and the grass yellows on its stem?
148
“There it is!” It’s two o’clock in the morning. The plane has seen our signals and reduces its altitude. The breeze won’t bother the descent, by parachute, of the visitor that we await. The moon is of bright tin and sage. "The eardrum poets’ school," whispers Leon, who always coins the right phrase for any situation.
149
The arm inside my cast hurts. The dear Doctor Great Gaunt [Grand Sec] managed marvelously despite the swelling. Luck that my unconscious directed my fall so aptly. Otherwise the grenade I was holding in my hand, its pin pulled, might well have exploded. Luck that the feldgendarmes heard nothing, thanks to their truck motor, which was running. Luck that I didn’t lose consciousness, my head in a pot of geraniums... My comrades compliment me on my presence of mind. With difficulty I persuade them that I don’t deserve the credit. Everything happened without my participation. After a fall of eight meters I felt like a basketful of broken bones. Happily, almost nothing happened.
150
It is a strange feeling, determining the fate of certain individuaIs Without your intervention, life’s mediocre séance table would not otherwise have jumped. Whereas here they are, delivered up to the great touching juncture...
151
Answer "Absent" for yourself, otherwise you risk not being understood.
152
The silence of the morning. The apprehension of colors. The luck of the hawk.
153
I understand better today this need to simplify, to make everything into one, at the instant of deciding if such and such must happen or not. Man withdraws from his labyrinth reluctantly. Millenary myths urge him not to leave.
154
Given to exaggeration, the poet reckons correctly under torture.
155
I love those so enamored of what their hearts imagine to be freedom that they immolate themselves to avoid the limited freedom of death. Marvelous merit of the people. (Perhaps free will does not exist. Perhaps the individual is defined by his cells, his heredity, the brief or prolonged course of his destiny... Still, there exists between all that and Man an enclave of unanticipated beings and metamorphoses whose approach must be defended and whose continuity assured.)
156
Accumulate, then distribute. Be the most compact, most useful, and least apparent part of the universe’s mirror.
157
We are racked with grief at news of the death of Robert G. (Emile Cavagni), killed in an ambush at Forcalquier, Sunday. The Germans deprive me of my best brother in action, whose helping hand averted catastrophes, whose punctilious presence bore directly on the possible failings of each of us. A man without theoretical training but brought up amid difficulties, of undeviating goodness, his judgment was impeccable. His behavior was shaped by stirring audacity and wisdom. Ingenious, he pushed his advantages to their farthest extreme. He carried his forty-five years vertically, like a tree of freedom. I loved him without effusiveness, without unnecessary weight. Unshakably.
158
We are discovering, by conjuring them, adaptible wings, smiles without rancor, in the vulgar prison of thieves and assassins. The Man-with-the-fist-of-cancer, the great internal Murderer has evolved in our favor.
159
Such a strong affinity exists between the cuckoo and the furtive creatures we’ve become that whenever this bird, hardly visible or clothed in grayish anonymity, crosses our sight, he tears from us, in echo to his wrenching cry, a lingering shudder.
160
Dew of men, tracing and dissembling its frontiers between daybreak and the emergence of the sun, between the eyes that open and the heart that remembers.
161
Maintain towards others what you promised to yourself alone. Therein lies your contract.
162
This is the era when the poet feels rising within him the meridian force of ascension.
163
Sing your iridescent thirst.
164
Faithful and immeasurably vulnerable, we oppose our consciousness of the event to the gratuitous (there’s another saying purified).
165
The fruit is blind. It is the tree that sees.
166
For a legacy to be truly great, we must not see the hand of the deceased.
167
Ketty, the dog, enjoys taking delivery as much as we do. She goes from one to the other without barking, in fearless knowledge of the thing. The work done, she stretches out happily on the dune of parachutes and goes to sleep.
168
Resistance is only hope. Like the moon of Hypnos, full tonight in all its quarters, tomorrow vision over poems passing by.
169
Lucidity is the wound closest to the sun.
170
The rare moments of freedom are those during which the unconscious becomes conscious and the consciousness nothing (or a mad orchard).
171
Ashes of the cold are in the fire that sings refusal.
172
I pity the one who makes others pay his debts, adding to them the prestige of false vacuity.
173
It is the case with certain women as with ocean waves. Flinging themselves forward in their youth, they clear a rock too high for their return. From then on, a puddle stagnates there, imprisoned, beautiful in the lightning because of the salt crystals it contains, which slowly take the place of its living essence.
174
The loss of truth, the oppression of this managed ignominy which calls itself good (evil—fantastic, inspired, not depraved—is useful) has opened a wound in man’s side which only the hope of the vast unformulated faraway (unhoped-for life) attenuates. If the absurd is master here below, I choose the absurd, the antistatic, whatever gets me closest to pathetic chance. I am a man of river-banks—excavation and inflammation—since it isn’t always possible to be a man of torrents.
175
The population of the meadows enchants me. Its frail beauty, reft of venom. I never tire of reciting it to myself. The field vole, the mole, somber children lost in the chimera of the grass, the blindworm, son of glass, the cricket, conformist as they come, the asshopper who flaps and counts its linen, the butterfly who play-cts drunkenness and irritates the flowers with its silent hiccups, the ants made wiser by the vast verdant expanse, and just above it, the meteoric swallows... Meadow, you are the day’s container.
176
Since the kiss on the mountain, time is guided by the golden summer of her hands and the oblique ivy.
177
Children accomplish the charming miracle of remaining children and seeing through our eyes.
178
The color reproduction of Georges de la Tour’s Prisoner, which I’ve stuck on the whitewashed wall of the room in which I work, seems over time to reflect its meaning into our circumstances. It wrings our hearts, but how deeply quenches our thirst! For two years now, not one resistance fighter who hasn’t, coming through the door, burned his eyes on what that candle proves. The woman explains, the walled-in prisoner listens. The words that fall from this terrestrial silhouette of a red angel are essential words, words that immediately bring help. In the depths of the dark cell the minutes of the tallow’s clarity lengthen and dilute the features of the seated man. His dry-nettle thinness—I see not one memory to make it shiver. His bowl is in ruins. But the swollen gown abruptly fills the dark cell. Better than any dawn, the Word of woman gives birth to the unhoped-for. My gratitude to Georges de la Tour who mastered the Hitler-shadows with a dialogue between two human beings.
179
Come to us who stagger with sunstroke, unscornful sister, oh night!
180
It is the hour when the windows escape the houses to light up at the end of the world where our world is going to dawn.
181
I envy the child who bends over the sun’s handwriting, then runs off toward school, sweeping away prizes and punishments with a red poppy.
182
Lyre for interned mountains.
183
We are fighting on the bridge thrown up between vulnerable being and its ricochet at the wellsprings of absolute power.
184
Heal the bread. Seat the wine at table.
185
Sometimes my refuge is the muteness of Saint-Just at the Convention of 9 Thermidor. I understand, oh how well, the practice of that silence, crystal shutters closed forever on communication.
186
Are we doomed to be only the beginnings of truth?
187
The action that has a meaning for the living has value only for the dead, finds completion only in those consciousnesses that inherit and question it.
188
Between the world of reality and me, there is no more layer of sadness today.
189
How many confuse revolt and temper, filiation and the efflorescence of feeling. But as soon as truth finds an enemy made to its measure, it puts aside the armor of ubiquity and fights with the actual resources of its condition. Indescribable, the sensation of this depth which volatilizes in becoming concrete.
190
Inexorable strangeness! In the midst of a badly defended life, to roll the living dice of happiness.
191
The most upright hour is when the almond springs from its restive hardness and transposes your solitude.
192
I see hope, the vein of a fluvial day-after, declining in the gestures of those who surround me. The faces that I love are dwindling in the meshes of a waiting which corrodes like acid. Ah, how little we are helped and encouraged! The sea and its shore, this visible step, are a whole sealed by the enemy, lying at the bottom of our common thought, which is molded in material made equally from the murmur of despair and the certainty of resurrection.
193
The numbness of our sleep is so total that not the gallop of the least dream manages to cross it, to refresh it. The chances of death are submerged in a flood so absolute that thinking of it is enough to stop our being tempted by the life we summon, we entreat. It is necessary to love us a great deal, this time too, to breathe more deeply than the executioner's lung.
194
I do myself violence to preserve my voice in ink, despite my mood. Thus, it is with a pen whose nib is a battering ram—ceaselessly extinguished, ceaselessly relit, collected, tensed—and with one breath that I write this, and leave out that. Automaton of vanity? Sincerely not. The necessity is to examine the evidence, to turn it into a created entity.
195
If I make it through, I know I’ll have to break with the aroma of these essential years, silently push faraway from me (not repress) my treasure, guide myself back to the principle of the most indigent behavior, as in that time when I was looking for myself without achieving prowess, in naked dissatisfaction, scarcely-glimpsed knowledge, and inquisitive humility.
196
The man around whom my affinity will swirl momentarily counts since his eagerness to serve coincides with a wholly favorable halo and my plans for him. Let's be quick to work together before what joins us to each other inexplicably turns hostile.
197
Be part of the leap. Do not be part of the banquet, its epilogue.
198
If life could be but disappointed sleep...
199
There are two ages for the poet: the age when poetry mistreats him in every respect, and the other, when she allows herself to be madly embraced. But neither is clearly defined. And the second is not supreme.
200
It is when you are drunk with pain that you feel no more pain than the crystal.
201
The road to the secret dances in the heat.
202
The presence of desire like that of a god knows nothing about the philosopher. In return the philosopher castigates.
203
Today I lived a moment of absolute power and invulnerability. I was a hive that took flight at the fountainhead of altitude, with all its honey and all its bees.
204
Oh truth, mechanical infanta, remain earth and murmur in the midst of the impersonal stars!
205
Doubt is at the origin of all greatness. Historical injustice does its utmost not to mention it. This doubt is genius. Don’t confuse it with uncertainty, which is caused by the crumbling of the power to feel.
206
All the pretense to which the circumstances force me extends innocence. A gigantic hand is carrying me in its palm. Each of its lines qualifies my conduct. And I remain there like a plant in its earth although my season comes from nowhere.
207
Certain acts of mine clear a path through my nature, as a train runs through the countryside, following the same unintentionality with the same fleeing art.
208
The man who sees only one wellspring knows only one storm. The chances within him are thwarted.
209
My inability to fix my life comes from the fact that I am faithful not to one but to all of those beings with whom I find myself in serious kinship. This constancy persists at the very heart of contradictions and differences. In a moment when emotion and literal meaning are interrupted, humor leads me to conceive of these beings as allies in the exercise of my elimination.
210
Your audacity, a wart. Your action, a specious image, preferably in color. (Always present in my memory is the inane remark of the coal-merchant in Saumanes who asserted that the French Revolution had purged the region of a thoroughly criminal nobleman: a certain Sade. One of his exploits had consisted of murdering his farmer’s three daughters. The Marquis’s underwear was taut before the first beauty had expired... This idiot couldn’t let it go, the mountain-dweller’s greed obviously unwilling to make any concessions.)
211
The just are growing blurred. Here are the greedy, turning their backs on the vaporous heather.
212
Plunge into the unknown that cuts furrows. Make a point of spiraling.
213
I followed Florence with my eyes this morning as she returned to the Calavon Mill. The path flew around her: an orchestra pit of mice was squabbling! The chaste back and long legs never quite grew smaller in my eyes. The throat of jujube lingered at the edge of my teeth. Until the greenery at a turning hid her from me, I scanned, aroused by every note, her admirable musician body, unknown to my own.
214
I haven’t seen a star light up in the forehead of those who were going to die, but rather the pattern of a blind which, raised, allowed a glimpse of orderly objects, wrenching and resigned, in a vast room where happy servants circulated.
215
Heads of sticky sap have unexpectedly arisen in our winter, no one really knows why, and congealed there ever since. A soiled future is inscribed in their lines. Like this Dubois whose Spartan police-spy fat confirms and perpetuates him. Just men of heaven and stray bullet, bestow on him the palms of your humor...
216
It is no longer possible that the shepherd be guide. This, decided by politics, the new farmer-general.
217
Olivier le Noir [Oliver the Black] asked me for a basin of water to clean his revolver. I suggested gun oil. But water was exactly what was called-for. The blood on the sides of the washbowl exceeded my imagination. What good would it have done to dwell on the shameful silhouette, the gun in his ear, slumped in his viscid coil? A just man was back, his work done, like one who having scrupulously broken up his earth would scrape his spade clean, before smiling into the blaze of the vineshoots.
218
In your conscious body, reality is ahead of the imagination by several minutes. A period of time never-recaptured, this chasm is foreign to the acts of this world. It is never a simple shadow, despite its odor of nocturnal clemency, religious remnant, incorruptible childhood.
219
Abruptly you remember that you have a face. The features it was modeled on were not all sad, once. Toward this multiple landscape rose beings endowed with goodness. Their fatigue charmed more than shipwrecks. The solitude of lovers breathed in them. Look. Your mirror has changed into fire. Imperceptibly you grow aware of your age again (it had leapt off the calendar), of this superfluity of existence which your efforts will make into a bridge. Withdraw into the mirror’s interior. If you don’t consume its austerity, at least its fertility has not run dry.
220
I dread the overexcitement as much as the chlorosis of the years following the war. I have a presentiment that comfortable unanimity, the bulimia of justice, will be short-lived, as soon as the ties are cut that bound our combat. Here, people prepare to demand the abstract; there, they blindly repress all that might attenuate the cruelty of the human condition in this century, permitting it to reach the future with a confident step. Already evil everywhere is struggling against its remedy. Ghosts issue repeated advice, re-atedly visit, ghosts whose empirical soul is a mass of mucus and neuroses. This rain penetrating man to the bone is but hope for aggression, attentive listening to contempt. They will rush into amnesia. They will forgo discarding, excising, and healing. They will suppose that the buried dead have nuts in their pockets and that the tree will someday, fortuitously, sprout. Oh life, give the living, if there is still time, a little of your good subtle sense, without deceptive vanity, and perhaps above all give them the certitude that you are not as accidental and remorseless as they say. It is not the arrow that is hideous, it is the hook.
221
Map of the evening  Once more the new year mingles our eyes. High grasses keep watch, who love only gunfire and addictive prison. Afterwards will be the conquerer’s ashes And the tale of evil; Will be love’s ashes; The wild rose lasting longer than the death knell; Will be your ashes, The imaginary ones of your immobile life on its cone of shadow.
222
My vixen, rest your head on my knees. I am not happy, and yet you are enough. Candlestick or meteor, there is no full heart or future left on earth. The steps of dusk reveal your murmur, lair of mint and rosemary, whispered secret between autumn’s russets and your ethereal dress. You are the soul of the mountain with its deep flanks, its rocks hushed behind lips of clay. How the wings of your nose tremble. How your hand secures the path and draws the curtain of the trees closer. My vixen, in the presence of the two stars, frost and wind, I place in you every broken hope, for a victorious thistle of rapacious solitude.
223
Life that cannot and does not wish to lower its sail, life that the winds return to the birdlime of the shore, foundered but always ready to leap beyond its stupor, life less and less adorned, less and less patient, assign me my role, if it exists, my legitimate role in the common destiny at whose center my singularity stands out as a stain but binds the amalgam.
224
Formerly, at the moment when I went to bed, the idea of a temporary death in the bosom of sleep restored me; today I sleep to be alive for a few hours.
225
The child does not see the man in an unflinching light, but in a simplified one. Therein lies the secret of their inseparability.
226
A judgment that engages does not always strengthen.
227
Man is capable of doing what he is incapable of imagining. His head tills the galaxy of the absurd.
228
For whom do martyrs do their work? Greatness resides in the departure that compels us. Exemplary beings are of vapor and wind.
229
The color black contains the living impossible. Its mental domain is the seat of all surprises, all paroxysms. Its prestige escorts poets and trains men of action.
230
All the virtue of the August sky, of our confiding anguish, in the golden voice of the meteor.
231
Shortly before his torture, Roger Chaudon said to me, "On this earth you sometimes get the upper hand, mostly you get the worst of it. The order of the times can’t be reversed. That’s basically what keeps me calm, despite the joy of being alive which shakes me like a thunderbolt..."
232
The exceptional neither fascinates its murderer nor moves him to compassion. Alas! he has the eyes required for killing.
233
Take into account, without being affected by it, that what evil most willingly strikes are those ill-informed targets it has managed to approach at leisure. What you’ve learned about men—their incoherent reversals, their incurable moods, their taste for uproar, their buffoonish subjectivity—must prompt you, once an action is finished, not to linger too long on the scene.
234
Eyelids at the doors of a happiness as fluid as the flesh of a shellfish, eyelids the enraged eye cannot overwhelm, eyelids, what an honorable job you do!
235
Anguish, skeleton and heart, town and forest, filth and magic, upright desert, seemingly vanquished, victorious, mute, mistress of the word, woman for all men together, and Man.
236
"My body was more immense than the earth and I knew only a tiny part of it. From the bottom of my soul, I welcome such innumerable promises of bliss that I beg you to keep your name our secret."
237
In our shadows, there is not one space alone for Beauty. The whole space is for Beauty. -NK
